# Bonds

I need to rename this to: "back stories" (is the echo with Storytelling
a plus or a minus?), "relationship", "history", "shared past", "past".

## Designing bonds

Bond cards have to be story factories. They also need to hint at deep
character relationships and feelings (question 4 below). The two goals
work together: the card must suggest not a single incident, but years
and struggle.

Things to consider, as a player, when choosing your Bond:

1.  Does it give you ideas for stories you want to tell?

2.  What does the card say about you? Will you enjoy playing that
    character?

Things to ask, as GM, after the card is picked:

1.  **How did it begin?** ("How did you meet?", "Why did you each end up
    there?")

2.  **What was it like?** ("What sort of thing would you do together?",
    "What dangers did you face?", "What are some things that happened
    there?") The characters should be in close contact for quite some
    time.

3.  **How did it end?** ("Why did it all fall apart?", "Why did you
    leave?", "What happened to you in the end?")

    - tragedy
    - defeat
    - flight
    - personal conflict
    - intervention
    - change/growth

    Many cards only hint at a brewing conflict: "You fanned the flames
    of their hatred, winning them notoriety". Get the players to tell
    you what that conflict was and what happened. (Maybe they found out
    and tried to have you shot, which ironically made them the top
    lunatic celebrities in the kingdom.)

    This period of close contact needs to end, because each player has
    *two* bonds, and they could end up being contradictory. The easiest
    way to reconcile that sort of problem if the two bonds just happen
    in different years. (Typically players simply won't choose a second
    bond that is completely impossible to reconcile with their other
    bond.  If there's a problem, you'll sort it out.)

4.  **How do you feel about each other now?** (keeping in mind, feelings
    aren't always mutual)

    If the players don't know how their characters feel about each
    other, it's not a great bond.

**Make sure the players have answers to these questions.** Jot them down
for your own benefit; but you can let players change their minds about
these answers during the game.

The idea is to get multiple stories they could tell, or better yet, to
get the creative juices flowing so that it seems like they could easily
come up with a cool story any time. Believing you can do it is most of
the way to doing it.

At the end of Bonding, you say "All right, I think you have a bunch of
good stories you could tell. You can talk it over and decide which one
you want to tell, or play it by ear."

TODO - see if this might work as 4 decks of cards. Not sure how in terms
of gameplay; leaves too much to brainstorming which is sort of what
we're trying to avoid.

TODO - look up how bonds work in D&D — i think they are single-character
elements, consistent with D&D being dumb but easy to begin

TODO - try out a random-text-generator where a grammar terminates early,
in a mad-libs-style skeleton that must be filled in by a separate
algorithm. The other algorithm can choose related words to fill in the
blanks, so a context-free grammar can produce a skeleton that ends up
packed with rich context.

"(foo / bar / baz)" indicates checkboxes, and "*[choose job:
woodcutter]*" indicates a Mad-Libs-style fill-in-the-blank, with
"woodcutter" pencilled in as an example.

The number in parens on each entry is a rating out of 10. The rating is
mostly based on how easy or hard I think it would be to come up with
stories for the bond. "productive" means the card could produce a wild
variety of stories. "too much" means the card is doing too much of the
work, providing too-specific details for the players. "thin" and
"uninspired" are the opposite. "trust fall" means the card has dramatic
potential, but it's up to the players to see it and mine it. I don't
expect a "trust fall" card to be good in practice.


## Bond cards

Regular jobs:

*   You were animal designers in an elvish zoo. (What kind of animals
    did the elves want? What did you want to make instead?) (9)

*   You were volunteer firefighters in a farm community when it fell on
    hard times and there were suddenly lots of fires, dangerous ones
    (why?)  (7)

*   You were wild yeast gatherers. Once, you followed a yeast strain
    into (the king's lands / a bandit's hideout / lizardfolk territory /
    a faerie forest / a haunted estate). There you (witnessed a crime /
    were forced into a pact / learned a shocking truth) that you would
    keep secret for many years. (7)

*   An earthquake opened a chasm, belching sulfurous smoke and dividing
    your town in half. The two of you started a sky ferry. When others'
    efforts to build a bridge ended in disaster, you were blamed. (What
    disaster? Were you involved?) (6)

*   You had a two-person *[choose performance: penguin-juggling]* circus
    act; it fell apart due to (fraud and betrayal / an escape / a revolt
    / substance abuse / prima donna fit / nervous breakdown / explosive
    tempers / a riot / arrests and recriminations) (5)

*   You worked on an assembly line at a *[choose noun: golem]* factory,
    both used to blow all your money on *[choose vice: cherry candy]*
    (4, no conflict, oddly charming)

*   You were gofers for two bitter rivals, the finest *[choose job:
    jewelers]* of a generation. You (scammed them both, taking money to
    "sabotage" the other / fanned the flames of their hatred, winning
    them notoriety / met in secret to discuss their ideas). (4,
    uninspired)

*   You were zookeepers when a disgruntled wizard came to the zoo and
    *[choose incident: Enlarged all the animals]* (3, single incident,
    not super likely to forge long-term relationship)

*   You worked together in an office/stables/temple/lab/bar/newsroom,
    bowled and caroused together. (3, thin)


Adventuring jobs:

*   You were adventurers for hire who met when a rich eccentric paid you
    to capture a wild *[choose animal: lizard]* from a local *[choose
    place: cave system]* (10 for my gang)

*   One of you worked as a spy, feeding information to the other, who
    was their Agency handler. (7)

*   You were: the owner of a small ranch; and the person they hired to
    help fight *[choose animal: sheep]* rustlers. (What was the tensest
    situation you faced?) (7)

*   You were barista assassins at the *[choose name: Bean and
    Broomstick]*. (6, productive but trust fall)

*   You guarded a caravan bringing salt and other essentials over the
    desert to a creepy (zealot settlement / cloister / mine / ghost
    town); the same hard route, back and forth, for four eventful years
    (6)

*   You ran two "stations" on an Underground Railroad, normally a
    purposely distant relationship—until things went horribly wrong
    (how?)  (6, trust fall, disruptive, good subject matter)

*   You were traveling missionaries on commission, paid per conversion.
    One longed to cheat, which would have been easy money, but the other
    was too straitlaced. (4, no fun)

*   You were guards in an already famine-stricken land, when (sages /
    *[choose name: Lord Brivin]*) insisted a worse famine was coming and
    ordered food stockpiled. You defended full grain silos against
    angry, starving people. (How did you cope? Were the predictions
    right?) (4, dramatic but thin on events)

*   You were bodyguards for *[choose person: a bishop]*. You were
    waylaid by a dozen assassins. You took out half before being shoved
    off a balcony, but the *[choose power: Synod]* were furious that you
    lived and your charge died. (What did they do?) (4, trust fall)


Crime:

*   One of you turned the other in to the authorities for *[choose
    crime: seditious graffiti]*. An outrageous betrayal, but they made
    it right, years later. (How?) (8, a tough narrative and moral
    puzzle)

*   You were: a crime family *[choose job: accountant]* in charge of
    stolen pieces of *[choose artifact: an ancient wizard's staff]*; and
    a chaos paladin who talked them into running away and using the
    pieces for good. Life on the run. (8)

*   You spent a year on the same small, but renowned, (gang of highway
    robbers / pirate ship), named *[choose name]*. They were like a
    family, *[choose adjective: foolish]* but *[choose adjective:
    big-hearted]*. (7)

*   You were an anonymous crime-fighting vigilante duo in *[choose
    place: a big city]*. (Who did you fight?) It was dangerous. Your
    only "power" was knowledge of *[choose terrain: the sewers]*. Then
    *[choose person: a teen detective]* discovered your secret. (What
    happened?) (6)

*   You were urchins on the streets of *[choose place: Grimsdale]*. An
    elegant lady paid you to *[choose errand: kill rats]*. You became
    her hired underworld help. (What was her secret? In the end, what
    errand was too dirty even for you?) (5)

*   You were the only two honest City Guards in corrupt *[choose city
    name: Pittsvegas]*.  Worked together, tirelessly, on a scheme to get
    the worst grifters caught and punished. (How did that work out for
    you?)  (5)

*   You were a team of two (cat burglars / small-time cons). You
    delighted in leaving red herrings to torment your nemesis, Inspector
    *[choose name: Rousseau]*. (4, red herrings not helping with
    stories)

*   You both worked on a ranch one summer. It turned out to be the home base
    of a gang of (horse thieves / *[choose farm animal: cattle]*
    rustlers).  (4, thin)

*   You were swashbuckling bandits with a common enemy, the *[choose
    relation: brother]* of a *[choose noun: thief]* you *[choose
    villainy: stabbed]*, who is also *[choose position of power: sheriff
    of this county]*. (How have you dealt with this enemy so far?) (5)


War:

*   You were shipmates when the traitor, Admiral *[choose name: Fistula]*,
    ordered the fleet to surrender to *[enemy: the Lurkish]*. Many ships
    obeyed this order. Your captain did not. (Was there then a battle? A
    court-martial? How did you testify?) (9)

*   You met as prisoners from two ships from different countries,
    captured by the same Crown warship, in the days those were no better
    than pirates. Led a prisoner revolt and took command of a brig,
    lived as pirates yourselves for a decade. (9)

*   You were captain and first officer on a ship, on a mission of
    exploration. (7)

*   You served as marines on a ship sent to explore a distant continent.
    You were the only two marines. They should have sent more. (7)

*   You were soldiers, buddies in the infantry, did everything together
    on a multi-year campaign. (6)

*   When *[choose power: the Red King]* laid siege to *[choose place:
    Labyrincia]*, there ws a long impasse, for instead of wall or moat,
    the city was ringed with a maze. Your job was to smuggle in food and
    arms.  (How did you get past the enemy's forces? What was the mood
    in the city?) (6, too much but awesome)

*   You were captives from two different conquered peoples, taken to the
    capital to serve in the Emperor's court. (What mischief did you get
    up to?  What intrigue was happening all around you?) (5)

*   You were captain and lieutenant in a war that was hopeless from the
    beginning, but for which the enlisted troops were enthusiastic.
    (What reckless bravery did you witness? How did you struggle to get
    your troops through alive?) (4)

*   You were *[choose flying mechanism: pegasus]* flyers together in the
    war. Always the underdogs. The other side had (superior numbers /
    *[choose other flying mechanism]* / ground-to-air lightning). (3)

*   You were a political officer and a military officer (in a squad / on
    a ship). You shared a politically lethal secret and narrowly avoided
    detection (2)

*   You were: a young hero just coming into their strength; and an old
    bard who's seen it all, drawn from retirement to sing new verse of
    the new hero--and to advise them. (1)


Journeys and Survival:

*   You were marooned on the same island in separate incidents *[choose
    time span: 2 months]* apart, met there, and teamed up to get home
    (8)

*   You were the sole survivors of an expedition to *[choose place:
    Planetia Nullia]*. The others all (vanished / died in the extreme
    conditions / were killed by hostile people / were eaten by *[choose
    menace: spiders]*). (Why did you live?) You saved each other's lives
    many times while fighting for survival the next *[choose time span:
    1 1/2 years]*. (8)

*   You were abandoned on a *[choose biome: jungle]* shore together,
    trekked 1500 miles home, through many dangers (7)

*   You were: (an astronomer / a reader of stars / a spellweaver); and
    the *[choose job: stablehand]* assigned to bring them safely to an
    old Druidic observatory. (Why were you away much longer than
    expected?)  (7)

*   members of an expedition to capture a breeding pair of a critically
    endangered species of *[choose animal: porcupine]*. You faced
    *[choose dangerous weather: tornadoes]*, *[choose dangerous animal:
    owlbears]*, and *[choose dangerous people: poachers]*. (5)

*   You were the sole survivors of a village wiped out by (plague /
    *[choose natural disaster: ants]*). (How did you live afterwards?)
    (5)

*   You were trapped (by floods / in a seige / on the ice / in a giant
    magic bubble) together for 6 months (5)

*   You were in the army at the same time, met when one saved the
    other's life in a crazy situation (4, single incident)

*   You were members of allied armies who met in the wild celebration in
    the enemy's capital, when the war was won at last. You bonded over
    (chess / drink / wrestling contests / both being robbed or cheated
    the same way). (When the orders came to ship out, what did you do?)
    (4, boring stories)


School:

*   You were students in a secret school run by *[choose organization:
    the Order of the Ebon Hand]*, ran away when the authorities shut it
    down and became *[choose job: beggars]* (6)

*   You were competing scholars in a *[choose activity: glaciology]*
    competition that got out of hand and wrecked the campus (how?  what
    was your joint punishment?) (6)

*   You were academy mates. Burning with (philosophical Ethics /
    political fervor / phoenix whiskey), you teamed up to sneak *[choose
    artifact: a crystal skull]* out of a campus museum and back to an
    underground tomb, restoring a thousand ancient curses and traps on
    the way out, nearly cornering, poisoning, bisecting, blinding,
    drowning, impaling, and dooming yourselves many many times. (4,
    single incident but a pretty good one)

*   You were pals at the Academy. One of you once summoned a lesser
    demon and promised it the other's *[choose asset: sense of smell]*
    and *[choose asset: left big toe]*. Their idea of a joke—but the
    demon didn't see it that way. (What deal did you strike?) (5)

*   You were: the only living speaker of a dead language; and a scholar
    of arcana. You teamed up to translate ancient scrolls. What did you
    discover? (5, thin but productive)

*   You were athletes on the same *[choose sport: skulling]* team; lost
    your scholarships when *[choose unlikely event: caught with the
    dean's daughters]* (4, thin)


Magic:

*   You were lab partners in wizard school. One of you released a prank
    spell that spread like a virus and *[choose effect: made everyone
    look and talk like orcs]*. (Were you expelled? Pursued by mobs?) (9)

*   You were merchants who once touched a cursed shipload of junk and
    could not speak until they sold every piece. It took *[choose span
    of time: 18 years]* and reduced you to poverty. (8)

*   You were acolytes when the gods sent *[choose violent miracle: a
    rain of stone]* to destroy the Temple of *[choose place:
    Mt. Aggro]*. As you fled, you saved *[choose person or thing]*. (How
    long did you carry it?) (8)

*   You were test subjects in a wizard experiment. It left you with
    *[choose oddity: giant antlers]* for *[choose time span: 6
    months]*. A great *[choose noun: lummox]* became convinced you were
    *[choose anything: infernal elk]* and began hunting you. (8)

*   As students of *[choose name: the Witch Kaika-hexa]*, you were given
    the rare chance to look into *[choose magic item: her silver
    mirror]*. The other students saw strange things, but what you saw
    made you abandon your studies and run away. (What was it? Were you
    pursued?) (6)

*   You called upon (spirits / ancestors / gods / demons) in desperation
    and accepted their offer. (They sent you each other. / You paid the
    price in different ways. / Now you are on the run from them.) (6,
    thin but in a good way?)

*   As kids, you discovered *[choose spooky magic: a dry well that
    whispers]*. No one ever believed you. To convince them, you
    recklessly *[choose action: explored deep caves]*.  (You're still
    close. What magical discovery does no one believe you about now?)
    (5)

*   As childhood friends, you pranked a *[choose magical creature:
    witch]*, who cursed you with *[choose gift: a telepathic
    link]*. (How did you cash in on it? How has it been inconvenient?)
    (4, tricky)


Family:

*   You are siblings, older one constantly getting the mischievous,
    impulsive younger one out of scrapes and even serious dangers (6)

*   You are siblings. You grew up *[choose locale: on a corn
    farm]*. Life was *[choose adjective: beautiful]*. You left together
    when *[choose tragedy: the elephant-crows came]* (5)

*   You were orphans raised by the same (dismal orphanage / religious
    order / *[choose job: woodcutter]* / cottage-dwelling gnome family /
    wolfpack) (5)

*   You are cousins, black sheep and goody-two-shoes of the
    family. Mutual exasperation and outrage throughout your teenage
    years. Later, fate threw you together when *[choose event: the gold
    rush started]*. (3)

*   You are: a grandparent and a streetwise kid who does everything for
    them out of family loyalty, traveling together *[choose reason: to
    see the wonders of the world]*. (3)


Friendship:

*   As (hometown friends / cousins / twins), you got into *[choose
    animal or vehicle: dinosaur]* races as teenagers, an obsession that
    threw you in with a very weird crowd. (7)

*   You were with your parents among the mourners when the great hero
    *[choose name: Ecgtheow]* was killed. You (cried together for your
    country's loss / fought and forged a bond of blood / vowed to become
    heroes yourselves / began to write down the hero's story). (7,
    productive)

*   You are unlikely friends of quite different ages, who team up to
    solve mysteries and *[choose adorable cross-generational activity:
    drink green tea]*. (List your greatest cases.) (6)

*   You were friends from rival families in the (renowned / holy /
    corrupt / clan-ruled) city of *[choose name: Thrand]*. You met
    *[choose place: in the sewers]*. At first you told no one. (6, trust
    fall)

*   The two of you founded a fringe political group that believed
    *[choose unusual view: men should be ruled by dogs]*; much
    persecuted (how? by whom?)  (4, boring stories)

*   You were best friends. One of you had a burning hatred toward
    *[name: Vasily Njorg]*, because (you said) *[bad reason: he was too
    loud]*, but really because *[even worse reason]*. After simmering a
    long time, you challenged them to a duel. (4, mostly a single
    incident)

*   You met in a bohemian art clique, smoked a lot of dope together,
    made great art, and did an occasional petty crime. One night you met
    a stranger who did something you've never been able to explain. (3,
    thin)

*   You were members of two hated minority religions, far from home,
    necessarily roommates because only *[choose name: Tom "Don't Care"
    Marther]* would rent to you. (How did you end up sticking up for
    each other?)  (3, thin)

*   You found *[choose something unusual: a magic lamp]* in a ditch, and
    kept it hidden and secret as long as you could. (3, thin)

*   A pair of sages, you met at a funeral for a shared hero (who?) and
    became friends, camping out to observe the stars, exchanging
    letters, running a scholarly journal together. (1, boring stories)


Chance encounters/odd couples:

*   Passing through town on a grim, urgent quest after *[choose person
    or thing: the outlaw Poe]*, one of you hired the other on sight,
    without getting off your *[choose mount: horse]*—an extra *[choose
    role: sword]* in case things got ugly. (Did they?) (7)

*   You were: a barkeep at the *[choose adjective: Busty]* *[choose
    noun: Swan]*; and a mysterious stranger who appears from time to
    time. One day the stranger turned up in serious trouble. What was
    it? (6)

*   You were: a barkeep at the *[choose adjective: Busty]* *[choose
    noun: Swan]*; and a peddler who drops by from time to time. One day
    the peddler came in, *[choose mood: nervous]*, with an unusual
    business proposition. What is it? (6, trust fall)

*   You were a ranger and a *[choose calling: schoolteacher]*. You met
    in the (exodus / death march / dust bowl / refugee trail / retreat)
    from *[place: Gharaz]* and together brought 17 children to
    safety. (5, trust fall)

*   You were: a (true believer / charlatan / conspiracy theorist) who
    said an ancient prophecy would soon be fulfilled; and a sage who had
    discovered that this was true. The news was not welcome, whoever
    spoke it. (Why? Were you proven right?) (4, kind of too much)

*   You were: a child who saved a/an *[choose noun: turtle-koala]* from
    certain death; and the *[choose job: veterinarian]* who cared for
    them both.  (3, thin)


Romance:

*   *[choose two names: Hogartha & Baldrick]* had been engaged to be
    married since they were *[choose age: 16]*, but you disrupted their
    parents' plans by accidentally taking *[choose one of the names
    again: Hogartha]* on a hair-raising adventure through *[place: the
    Hungry Forest]*. (7, optionally romantic)

*   You were: housekeeper of the *[choose name: Brontily]* estate; and a
    courier, who daily delivered elaborate gifts from a suitor to the
    family's noble daughter. You (conspired to sneak the suitor into the
    daughter's chambers / tried to help her elope with her penniless
    true love / colluded to sell some of the gifts, as no one really
    wanted them) but it ended in farce. (6, optionally romantic)





## Unfinished/unclassified

*   an able sailor; and a (first mate / prisoner / respected guest) on a
    merchant vessel. After encountering (a storm / a ghost / a monster /
    pirates) they were stranded together on the open sea.

*   a teacher of *[choose subject: geometry]*; and a troublesome but
    tenacious and hard-working student. (The student surpassed the
    teacher. / The student paid with *[choose currency: muffins]*. / The
    lessons continued even in dire circumstances.) (4, thin, puzzly)

    or: "The teacher angrily broke off the lessons after discovering the
    student's real goal."?
    
    "hapless" rather than "troublesome"?





## Inspiration

After listening to half of a game of Companion's Tale, I wrote this list
of "theme cards". Quite useful!

- treachery, deceit
- appeal
- the brink
- detente
- savagery
- barbarians
- lawgiver
- peacemakers
- healing
- kind gesture
- long shot
- grief
- song of pleading
- revenge
- a slight
- long courtship
- a chest of coin
- secret told
- eclipse
- finery
- elaborate gifts
- preparation
- marriage
- unification
- flight
- mending
- imitation
- call upon spirits
- ancient even then
- severance
- meet the new boss...
- job well done
- fraternity
- secret societies
- faithless officer
- superlative art
- natural disaster
- army of automata
- servitude
- subversion of morals
- house divided
- hatred
- tribal distrust
- lingering disease
- injudiciousness
- overwhelming force
- reversal
- upset
- a dark horse
- a chance meeting
- prejudice
- a couplet
- contest
- lineage
- courtroom drama
- courtly intrigue
- foreign interference
- strange wildlife
- underworld recreations
- vicious cycle
- historical echo
- myth
- prophecy
- people cry out
- judgment
- reinterpretation
- responsibility
- neglect
- forgotten
- symbol to the people
- hero's end
- relentless pursuit
- ring-giver
- journey into death
- otherworldly device
- otherworldly creature
- a seductive object
- a vivid record
- tragedy
- defeat
- personal conflict
- clash of personalities
- culture clash
- intervention
- growth/flourishing


## Not-working bonds

These need to be fixed or deleted.

*   house tomte and sole surviving member of the house, who wanders into
    harms way daily and is rescued by the tomte's unceasing
    efforts. (disruptive)

*   partners in crime: (cutpurses / pickpockets / embezzlers / mobsters
    / corrupt officials).

    It all ended when:

    *   quarreled over money
    *   quarreled over a love interest
    *   got caught
    *   almost got caught, went on the run
    *   one betrayed the other
    *   were both betrayed
    *   one went legit
    *   muscled out by the thieves' guild
    *   acqui-hired by the thieves' guild
    *   mmmmmm, hasn't exactly ended

    (split remaining crime categories out to multiple cards, figure out
    wth to do with the laundry list of fiascos)

*   Together you rescued a dog left tied up in a flood. You didn't want
    to give the dog back to its uncaring owner. (So what did you do?) 
    (3, single incident, thin)

*   traveling troubadors in a small company. (2, super thin)


### Raw ideas

Can we get these straight out of movies?

*   called to the Clue mansion

*   planned an elaborate heist together

Epic stories and fairy tales seem a lot more productive.

*   old souls with a shared memory of past lives (...and?)
